he farms 40 acres in the small town of
Selma California and he's just published
what may be the best history of the
Second World War that you will ever read
Victor Davis Hanson joining us today on
common knowledge now
welcome to uncommon knowledge I'm Peter
Robinson a classicist and historian
Victor Davis Hanson is the author of
many books including the classic study
of the Peloponnesian War a war like no
other
dr. Hansen's newest book the second
world wars how the first global conflict
was fought and won now Victor and I
continue our conversation about this
magnificent new book the second world
wars Victor one of the many pleasures of
this book is that you provide
counterfactuals sort of what-ifs let's
take a couple of those the Second World
War is I'm quoting could the Axis powers
have incorporated their winnings and dug
in there was no reason why Hitler could
not have reorganized Europe from the
Atlantic to Moscow to ensure greater
industrial production and constrict the
conscripted armies as large as those of
the Soviet Union that Japanese held
Pacific and occupied Asia offered nearly
as many natural resources and recruits
as were available in North America and
the British dominions close quote if
Hitler had not attacked Russia he could
have consolidated position in Europe and
dominated the continent for who knows
how long and likewise the Japanese
Mongolia Southeast Asia what they didn't
need to attack Pearl Harbor why didn't
they consolidate there were people who
said just that in the case of Germany
that the General Staff there were people
within the general staff who said you
know what Britain we may not be able to
invade Britain but Britain can't really
do us damage and the Americans will not
intervene unless they're attack that was
true and the Soviet Union's are
supplying us with all sorts of oil and
wheat and precious metals and we've won
the war they thought they won the war by
April 1941 won the war for Europe yes
they did and they had the resources of
today's European Union but human nature
being what it is Hitler's idea was well
wait a minute I over ran France in six
weeks and World War one it took us four
years we only got 70 miles based on that
calculus six weeks will be three weeks
into Russia because Russia collapsed in
two and a half years France never did I
took the hardest I cracked the hardest
nut first
and now Russia like it was in 1917 and
18 will sue for peace in six weeks the
meaning half the time that it took me in
world war one he had this ratio in his
head
half Russia is going to collapse and
half the time that France did France
never did so now France collapsed so he
said well it's got to be three weeks
because it's it was six weeks that was
part of it and part of it he had not
been defeated in the case of Japan it
boggles the mind because here all of the
Pacific we keep saying well we we
provoked them with a Norlin bharat nuts
I mean they had it shale oil in
Indonesia right in their backyard they
had all of the rice of Southeast Asia so
all they have to do is they look at the
map and they did this at the beginning
and they say Vichy France is France
doesn't exist Vietnam Cambodia it's ours
Hollan ceased to exist it's off the map
all of its colonies in Indonesia are
ours British we confusing the oil
operation zactly and they got some oil
but not enough because the Dutch had
time to blow it up because of the war
but I'm getting that and Malaysia rubber
all they had to do was do two things do
not touch the Philippines and do not
touch Pearl Harbor and they would have
overrun all a British Dutch and French
and they would have had all a necessary
population base and resources they need
it they had one problem and that is
their supreme leadership as we discussed
we lived in a world of fantasy they
thought they were invulnerable and they
had all this idea of in Italy of rasa
the Franco idea that rasa means it were
racially superior or the Volk or the
Amato and in Japan whereas the Allies
didn't quite have that idea and they
were more realistic and then Viktor were
these leaders Mussolini Hitler Tojo and
that I guess Tojo wasn't a supreme
leader in the same way he had the war
cap and it was more of a shared
responsibility here they sit atop Italy
is a little more backward but still it
was a modern country certainly Hitler
and Tojo and the war cabin in Japan sit
atop what were by the standards of the
day massive industrial complicated
States and opera and they control
and yet they overreach they worry
were they nuts or were they evil how did
what they were motive they were both and
they had convinced themselves that the
initial victories in the case of Japan
since 37 but the initial victories from
39 especially to 41 were such that they
grew contemptuous of the resistance and
they said if the great French army
collapse if the United States will watch
London burn and do nothing if the
Chinese half of China now if the British
can't even bolster Singapore if the
Americans at Pearl Harbor only have
three carriers even though we had the
second largest fleet in the world they
logically developed a contempt and the
thing about deterrence is it doesn't
really matter that the British fleet is
the largest in the world and ours is the
second largest or that we have a
capability within three years to build a
bigger fleet than all the fleets in the
world combined
if you don't display that deterrence and
they thought well deterrence isn't
really material it's spirit and we have
a lawn and we've got a new paradigm or
modernist modern fascism Marshalls the
state it's technologically superior and
we didn't disabuse him of that it's sort
of like North Korea today telling us how
powerful they are when they have no clue
of what they're getting into the United
States because we're you know we're
sophisticated you main people we don't
want to display to North Korea what
could happen and that's very dangerous
because deterrence is also perceptions
as well as actual strength one more
counter factual fascinating
counterfactual again I'm quoting from
the second world wars quote American
commanders this takes a little bit to
set up but it's I think it's fascinating
American commanders were indoctrinated
in to tactical traditions and you trace
them both to the Civil War one was made
famous by ulysses s grant emphasizing
finding the enemy then controlling and
destroying him through overwhelming
firepower there was also a complementary
tradition of mobility and development
and stripping an enemy's ability to make
war by destroying his infrastructure in
morale and that tradition is made famous
by Sherman yes and his march to the sea
Oh
okay had the US Army utilized its
singular I'm quoting yoga and utilized
its singular motorized mobility and
tactical airpower in the manner that
Patton's Third Army had used it to cover
its flanks and then adopted a Sherman
desk attitude toward bypassing more
resistance and conducting encirclements
the war in theory might well have ended
before 1945 Patton is all about mobility
and he drives to the south and could
have gone through could easily have
taken Prague could have gone up to
Berlin and Eisenhower says no we advance
on a front steadily grinding grinding
grinding and it's tragic because so so
how would you well George Patton he had
trumpian characteristics he was a
blunderbuss and he said things he
shouldn't have said and people confuse
that lack of discipline with a lack of
talent he wasn't he was an authentic
military genius but we put him on ice
remember from July of 43 to 44 were
after the slapping incidents we didn't
have those talents and the planning of
Normandy but once we actually did do
Normandy and we gave him third army he
didn't advance according to the plan he
was the furthest from Germany and yet he
advanced the fastest and he people said
well there's gaps in our front he's
going too fast and he was begging them
to see that air power had changed that
with p-47s and p38 he had an ability to
protect his flanks and the Sherman tank
he and the m1 he had really a great deal
of confidence and their durability there
easy easy use and people were saying
we're gonna see a tiger one day and he's
you know there's only six hundred Tigers
who cares about a tiger we have air
power so he was way ahead of his time
and we we tend to do that the United
States if a person has not considered
sober and judicious we we equate that
with with a recklessness or a lack of
discipline with incompetence he was
absolutely competent he was brilliant
he spoke French he read German he he was
an intellectual and that was something
but in the Pacific we had people like
Chester Nimitz Spruance halls
that did the same thing as Sherman and
Patton were they skipped Islands they
skipped her ball they skipped over to
Iwo Jima into okinawa Tarla and they cut
they cut in the entire Japanese Empire
off of its supplies without having to
invade each one of these macarthur did
to a lesser extent well he probably
should have bypassed the Philippines but
there was that tradition that you don't
want to get head-to-head with a
fanatical enemy like a grant did in the
summer of 1864 where Sherman went around
the flank in Atlanta then the march of
the sea and into the Carolina there's
great argument in the US military about
hitting them head on
versus the Sherman esque Patton asked
Nimitz approach where we have so much
more capability logistical and
industrial and we have more mobility we
have air power C power we can cut them
off without having to fight them because
they're 19th century in their way they
fight in the sense that they're very
ferocious and they're extremely good
soldiers and we all you mentioned Patton
who could have swept around down to the
south Churchill we have cables B
Churchill begged Eisenhower and then
went over his head and went straight to
FDR begged them to let Montgomery go
across the North and get to Berlin part
of Kirk allistic calculation as I recall
was he wanted to get to Berlin before
the Red Army yes he did it was one of
the tragedies of the Normandy placement
of forces that of the the Allied armies
the the quick shot into the river valley
once you landed a Norman in the North
beaches at Normandy it was only 500
miles to get straight less than that
even go right through the Netherlands
into the Ruhr and you had the sober
judicious professional I don't want to
say plotter because Montgomery was a
very good organizer but he wasn't a
cutter he didn't he was slashing and not
a slasher and then you had the person
who had that ability and you put him to
the South not you know he was still
northern for central France but he had
the longest eight nine hundred miles and
that wasn't part of the plan he was
supposed to secure the and the other
direction the Atlantic port so had he
been to the north he would have got into
the Ruhr very quickly and won one more
on this counterfactual had Roosevelt
been his suspicious of Stalin's murder
gulag and expansionary plans as he was
sometimes of Churchill's
effort to preserve Britain's colonial
possessions the United States might have
been better prepared for the Cold War
what might Roosevelt have done well
Roosevelt basically said to Stalin our I
shouldn't say Roosevelt but his invoice
said we don't approve of communism but
we understand where you're coming from
that the Imperial colonial world is over
with and that we're going to support you
full heart Churchill said it's not over
with we can decolonize if we have to but
we have a humanizing mission abroad and
people under British colonies are much
different than the Soviet people under
Soviet Communism and that didn't appeal
to us so when we were giving aid and the
British were giving aid the British were
thinking Soviets yes they were thinking
what does this do when the German army
disappeared and the Americans in typical
American fashion were sort of less be
puritanical how can you even think of
that the Soviets are our allies we're
fighting against his horrible fascism
and nazism we don't want to think of the
post-war ramification where Churchill
was always saying you really he was
looking at five hundred years of history
and saying when you destroyed Germany
than you empower Russia Germany is the
Continental buffer between Western
Europe and Russia no matter what the
political system an Americans thought
you know that's an old game we don't
we're not gonna this is a year Lewis
yeah we're new people were we're
democratic this is the future of the
United Nations and we're all gonna live
in peace and we're gonna the Soviets and
the British and US will police the world
and we're gonna run this on principles
of quality and fairness and stallin I
mean that to him that was ludicrous all
right
the moral questions the Allies sought
not merely to end the war on useful
terms but to demand that the Axis powers
submit to unconditional surrender eight
which you call quote a historically rare
objective yes of most wars close quote
so even today you will hear it argued a
lot that if only we had not called for
unconditional surrender we could have
reached terms with the Japanese much
earlier there were cables between I
think they'll visit been substantially
but their cables we picked up that the
Japanese we're looking for terms of
surrender that Hitler may be a different
case but even with Hitler you could have
come to some arrangement earlier yeah
and that lives were lost needlessly
because Roosevelt and Churchill Stalin
as well but Roosevelt and Churchill was
these two deeply humane men who decided
in Casablanca as you say Stalin wasn't a
Casablanca they decided to insist upon
terms of unconditional surrender yeah
and we have to as historians we have to
look at what the world that they looked
at not as we look at post facto and they
were looking at the Versailles Treaty
and they said that combined the worst of
both traits and human nature we were
punitive in the sense of at Oracle II we
blame Germany but we did not divide
Germany we did not occupy it we did not
invade with occupation troops and we
created the myth that they had been sold
out by Jews or socialists why they were
in someone else's territory so this time
around we're not going to do that second
thing is they understood that every time
Germany had made a peace agreement
whether it was the franco-prussian war
or the September program that design and
World War one in September that what
they thought they were going to take
France or the bracelet ava's treaty that
knocked out Russia and World War one or
what they were envisioning after World
War two when they won they were pretty
barbaric and so they said you cannot
deal with his fascist countries and you
can't have an armistice like we did with
World War one that was a green light to
World War two so this time around we're
going to defeat we're going to humiliate
we're going to occupy and we're going to
read
bill these countries into consensual
societies so for all the effort that was
involved and we still have troops in all
three countries years later by giving
women the right to vote to take one
example in Japan or land redistribution
in Japan we created peaceful humane
societies I don't think that would have
been possible with an armistice but
today I mean for all our criticisms of
Japan and Germany and Italy they are
three of the most humane countries in
the world and they're strong US allies
and that was a direct result of the
vision of Roosevelt and Churchill but it
came at a cost and had we had an
armistice we probably would have been
able to cut a deal with Hitler and Tojo
in 1943 or four but we would have been
at war with them and a cold peace in the
fifties I think it would have been like
the first second third Punic War or what
we see in the Middle East with the 48 56
67 73 2006 war it's a bellum interrupts
them and they didn't want that and they
were willing to pay the extra and they
had societies that had been surprise
attack and generations of American and
British and Soviet citizens that were
willing to pay that price aerial bombing
you note that Britain and the United
States dropped 30 times as much tonnage
on Germany as Germany dropped on Britain
and with regard to Japan quote the March
9 to 10 1945 napalm fire bombing of
Tokyo remains the most destructive
single 24-hour period in military
history yeah close quote and then of
course we have the bombs on Hiroshima
and Nagasaki and the argument is that
the Allies violated one of the most
fundamental tenets of Just War theory by
targeting civilians yes never ever ever
is it permissible to target
non-combatants that is immoral in and of
itself to which Victor Davis Hanson
answers
well they had a point Curtis LeMay said
that if we'd lost the war he was the
architect of the fire race he would be
tried and convicted as a war criminal by
the victorious Japanese but everything
has a utilitarian foundation to the
so we had developed the b-17 and the
b-24 on a false premise the fortress the
b-17 Flying Fortress could fly in
formation it could knock down fighters
he could go with 1,200 miles a thousand
miles into enemy territory could
devastate we found out by 1943 that that
was not true the Norden bombsight was
not that accurate it was too cloudy over
Germany the best pilots and planes in
the world were focke-wulf 190s we didn't
have sufficient and we were butchered
40,000 people killed the British out of
the sky shot out of the sky of the great
tragedy of the World War two from our
point of view the British learned that
they were going to do that they called
it area bombing and they used Mornay but
they didn't have napalm we've developed
napalm but they did have incendiary and
they discovered after losing 40000 even
with great planes like the Lancaster
that they could not quite knock out
Germany so by 1944 this effort was in
crisis they had dental I had some
dividends they made Germany bring back
10,000 88 millimeter platforms from
Russia that were anti-tank guns to use
as flak guns but nevertheless they were
in a status they couldn't really know
what to do and then they hit upon the
idea we're gonna get fighter escorts and
we're going to area bomb transportation
hubs fuel depot go and lo going lower
and in same thing in Japan Curtis LeMay
said the b-29 is a two billion dollar
program bigger than the Manhattan
Project it has got no results it's too
high it's at 30,000 feet
there's a jet stream it misses the
target I want to take them low at 5,000
feet and use the jet stream they'll come
in at 400 miles an hour almost they'll
drop napalm they don't have to be
accurate the same idea that had worked
in Europe and the idea was not quite
that your bombing civilians only but you
can't hit a target you don't have the
expertise and the pre-war propaganda
that you could drop a bomb into a pipe
is completely replicated so what we're
going to do is we're going to burn
everything to burn out the railyard or
to burn out the coal to
to oil plant or to burn out the zero
factory and it was true but they took a
level of collateral damage that was
astonishing now they would say to us
give us the most optimistic number of
Italian I shouldn't say that word it's
an amoral term but give us the most your
greatest estimate of civilians that were
killed in Japan Germany and Italy and it
would be somewhere between 1 million and
one and a half million right and they
would say we were fighting a people that
by 1945 were killing 20,000 people in
Asia the Japanese 20,000 people per day
today in places like and the war itself
27,000 people were killed every day of
this 6-year war 6 million were killed in
Auschwitz and then they would say as
bomber Harris
they reproduce general yes British air
bomber eras said they reaped the wind
and they're gonna so the whirlwind
quoting biblical scripture and his point
was they started the war they surprise
attack this they set up death camps
they're killing prisoners the SS has a
atrocious record in the Soviet Union
it's a little rich for them to say that
we have to pinpoint targets when we know
that we don't have that ability so what
are you going to do when you're when the
Soviet Union is losing 10,000 men a day
and they say where's the where's the
second front and and we say well we're
North Africa maybe Italy I said that's
not enough how are you gonna stop a
hundred divisions coming and reinforcing
and we said we'll start bombing and now
the idea was we're gonna open a second
front to bombing and second front in the
air when you talk to people today if you
talk to Chinese citizens diplomats
consoles or you talk to people in
Indonesia or Southeast Asia I and I have
I don't think I've ever I never read a
lot of the literature I don't think you
ever see an argument that the United
States was cruel and inhumane for
bombing Japan it's usually the other way
around I wish they had a bombed earlier
for myself and you and all Americans
it's something that I will just end with
this call
that the fire rates were really much
more destructive than the atomic bombs
we got to remember that the war ended
May 8th 9th in Europe there was a
largest bombing fleet and the world was
in Europe so we had about 10,000 idle
b-17 b-24 British Lancaster was a superb
plane plus two-inch in middle bombers
b-25s and 26 we had taken Okinawa and
declared secure on July 2nd so Curtis
LeMay was building rare you know 5,000
foot runways we had 2,000 b-29s on order
that were arriving to supplement the
2,000 from the Marianas and Lemay's mind
I have a 10,000 playing four-engine
bombers that not three missions a week
from the Marianas 1,600 miles away right
- a day from Okinawa my only problem is
enough napalm so he would have burned
down all of Japan right so the actual
atomic bombs saved not so much an
invasion which problem a said we
wouldn't have done well we would have we
would have created a firestorm that I
think we would be regretting today so
the atomic bomb stopped that and we
would kill lot of Japanese five hundred
thousand but we didn't invade the
country and there were about seven
million Japanese soldiers there were
seven thousand kamikaze planes and we
avoided that through air power and there
is an irony that Japan was not as
willing and the post year wars to come
to terms with its criminal behavior in
World War two as was Germany and Italy
simply because we did not invade and
their territory was not fought over it
was reduced by airpower and then the
occupation was not a fought over
contestant occupation and so they had a
little bit more leeway under the
McArthur a proconsul ship than did
Germany and Italy Victor last questions
here you grew up as you write in the
book you grew up in your ranch the
family ranch in Selma in the Central
Valley of California
hearing first-hand accounts of the
Second World War from your father and
uncles first of all tell us why are you
named handsome
well my father's first cousin his mother
died in childbirth and his father was
blinded in a farming accident so he was
grew up with my father and they were
inseparable they went to university
Pacific under alonzo stagg and played as
ends on the football team they joined
the Marine Corps the family lore gets
hazy here somebody hit a Marine officer
there were big Swedes and one of them
had to take the blame and the military
said either you're gonna get kicked out
of the Marine Corps we're gonna fix you
Hanson we're gonna send you to this new
b-29 program where everybody gets killed
we heard it's just the worst thing in
the world in Nebraska so they kind of
decided that I think my father was the
one they hit the person so my Victor
went on the 6th Marine Division and
fought it was yes and he fought the
atrocious battle in Okinawa when he was
killed on the last day of Sugar Loaf
Hill and when I wrote a book once
ripples a battle I I was wondering what
happened and one of the people who in
his 90s read the book and said I have
his ring and he said when he was killed
on the last day he was a big sweet and
we couldn't bring him down his hands
swelled so we cut off the ring and and
when I got back I called your
grandfather and we're broken sweetie she
said I don't want to talk about it so
it's on my mantle so he sent it to me my
goodness and then my father and the
irony is that he went to the b-29
program went over to Tinian and he flew
40 missions as a central fire controls
of the 16 planes and a squadron I think
all but two were shot down or engine
failure crashed replacement crews and so
the person who was supposed to die lived
and a person who had a better chance of
living died
so your dad named you a victor and he
and he said you know I remember him
saying to me it's gonna be very hard
you've got a real burden because he was
a tall store or athlete and he was
killed I don't know if you can live up
to it but you got a try so so Victor you
you heard these stories from
participants I my father was in the war
as well so I have some first-hand
accounts you have kids now you're a
grandfather how do you convey
how do you make I don't know how how to
put the question other than to put it
this way how do you make them believe
how do you make them understand that
this happened yeah that's why I tried to
write the book because I asked myself
that same day I when I go to downtown
Palo Alto I go to New York or on my farm
nice see the security the prosperity
everything we have and I look at the
world abroad and I see you know
democratic government all over Europe
and Asia and all these miracles going on
I say to myself none of this would been
half would happen if it wasn't for these
people in the United States and their
counterparts in Britain in Australia
Canada and the Soviet Union as well and
I think wow they were willing to give up
everything for some idea and I asked
myself in in balance of melech call was
it worth it what they came back and they
looked at our culture today was this
what it was all for is this what dying
in Okinawa was for when you're 22 or
beginning blown up in a b-29 when you're
18 I hope it was so I think we have to
take a deep breath and stop looking at
history as melodrama where we go back
and look at the past and use the value
system of the presents to pick winners
and losers history's tragedy and we
should really instead say given the
material constraints put upon them and
given what they knew at the time how
they did what they did in World War two
is a miracle and we are indebted every
day of our lives to them and we need to
start I think honoring people the past
who did things I'm afraid to say I'm not
sure that I could do and my generation
could do when I was 21 years old I was
in graduate school studying Greek when
my father was 21 he had ear infections
sinus infections and he was in a b-29
high above Japan and emergency landed
and iwo jima and almost everybody was
killed and he got the highest medal of
the the airforce it seemed we Air Medal
for taking a 500 pound napalm bomb with
his hands it was locked in the bomb bay
and throwing it out and I can't think of
anything I've done in my entire life
like that I think that's true of our
whole generation
and Vietnam people were very courageous
as well in Korea but I think this
generation owes a lot to the generations
that came in and this is why I'm get so
depressed with these contemporary
controversies where people don't want to
do this or they don't think they have to
honor the flag they don't understand
that somebody just handed them a country
and what they think wow there's its this
is amour this ology it's it's not good
because it's not perfect and they don't
understand what they started with
the alternative vote that generation
said we just have to be better than the
alternative the alternative was Japanese
Holocaust German Holocaust and what the
Italians did in Africa it was a
Holocaust and yet we didn't do that and
so we say well we weren't perfect
therefore we weren't you know we were
very good what we did in World War two
and we need to remember Victor Davis
Hanson author of the second world wars
thank you thank you for having me I'm
Peter Robinson for uncommon knowledge
and the Hoover Institution thank you
[Music]